# CVE-2023-40481 7-Zip SquashFS Out-of-bounds Write
by Gibson K. Chomphuthip

## The Problem
I couldn't find a good blogpost explaining this bug and all descriptions are all super vague.
The bug existed in version 22.00 of 7-Zip, and was patched in 23.01, so lets take a look at 
the diff.

This seems to be the biggest semantic change between the two versions so let's
investigate further.
```
(Lines 1692 - 1695)
     const UInt32 unpackSize = (UInt32)_dynOutStreamSpec->GetSize();
-    if (unpackSize != kMetadataBlockSize)
-       if (i != numBlocks - 1 || unpackSize != (size & (kMetadataBlockSize - 1)))
-           return S_FALSE;
-    memcpy(_uids + kMetadataBlockSize * i, _dynOutStreamSpec->GetBuffer(), unpackSize);

+    const UInt32 remSize = (i == numBlocks - 1) ?
+        (size & (kMetadataBlockSize - 1)) : kMetadataBlockSize;
+    if (unpackSize != remSize)
+        return S_FALSE;
+    memcpy(_uids + kMetadataBlockSize * i, _dynOutStreamSpec->GetBuffer(), remSize);
```

`(size & (kMetadataBlockSize - 1))` retrieves the remaining data size.

In 22.00, if `unpackSize` is not equal to `kMetadataBlockSize`, then `i` must be
the last block AND `unpackSize` must be equal to the remainder.

Notice that the check to see if `unpackSize` is equal to the remainder only
happens if `unpackSize` is _not_ equal to `kMetadataBlockSize`.

This means that if a block is equal to  `kMetadataBlockSize` but the remainder of the buffer is less than
`kMetadataBlockSize`, the memcpy would write past the end of the buffer.

## The Fix
In 23.01, if `i` was the last block, then `remSize` would be set to the
remainder. Otherwise, `remSize` would be set to `kMetadataBlocksize`.

This means that `remSize` will _always_ be set to the remainder.

## Notes
I'm really interested in the engineering of medium to large codebases,
especially in C/C++. I heard somewhere that while a seasoned C programmer can
jump into any C codebase and be successful, C++ codebases develop a kind of
[DSL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-specific_language) to model the
problem they are trying to solve. This results in developers having to relearn a
bunch of new syntax for the same problem. Theoretically, the same thing can
happen in a C codebase through the heavy use of macros but using macros to
abstract is generally considered bad practice. I wonder how much this affects
the security (I would imagine a lot) of a C++ project vs. a C project.

I know this vulnerability wasn't the result of overzealous abstraction, but the
7-Zip codebase is full of wrappers around buffers and streams. This makes it a
little challenging for me, someone who isn't super familiar with the codebase,
trying to figure out what stuff means.
